# Phase I: Analyzing Users, Competitors, and Initial Designs

## Introduction

For Phase I of the project, we focused on understanding the challenges brought forth by social media as an industry, namely apps that rely on friend-making and scheduling as their minimum viable product. As a team, we decided that Meetup.com was closest in target to the expectations we had for our own web app, FriendMe. Our objective was to identify key areas for improvement that can enhance user experience and engagement, particularly for individuals seeking community and connection online. This phase is dedicated to analyzing user needs, competitor landscape, and initial design considerations.

## Methods

Our approach to research included an initial competitive analysis between seven of our closest competitors. Key areas of evaluation invloved strengths, weaknesses, quality level, cost, and the platform each competitor was available on. This was an important step to better understand the temperature surrounding the industry we aim to enter, and how we as a latecomer can differentiate ourselves.

Once we narrowed focus to Meetup.com, we then conducted a heuristic evaluation. This evaluation aimed to test the usability of Meetup.com against established criteria standard in the industry, some of which include visibility of system status, error prevention, consistency and standards, match between system and the real world, user control and freedom, flexibility, efficiency of use, aesthetic design, recognition vs recall, documentation, and helping users recognize, diagnose, and recover from errors. Scoring was based on a 1-10 scale, with 1 being the worst and 10 being the best, in addition to a brief explanation of the score. This process informed the direction behind some of our early design considerations present in the sketches included with this report in hopes of avoiding the same pitfalls we identified in Meetup.com.

Finally, the development of personas and scenarios was crucial in understanding the potential need of our users through the lens of their daily lives. It gave them a face and contextual background to better understand a generalized user's needs and motivations, not only to use our app but in a way that proved meaningful to them as well.

## Findings

The competitive analysis revealed that Meetup.com is our closest competitor in context of our minimum viable product (MVP). We believe that the MVP to be a social platform that gives friend groups the ability to schedule events and leverage powerful scheduling tools to make it easier to meet up in person. With this context in mind, our analysis showed that Meetup.com already has powerful scheduling tools, event management, has a lean toward topical communities, and is available on both mobile and web. However, it was not without its flaws. Its focus on event management means there is less attention for prominent social features to shine. There are no social profiles, no friend lists, and notifications were not engaging. 

The heuristic evaluation showed that the web version of Meetup.com has a strong foundation in usability design in at least half of the criteria we evaluated, but showed room for improvement in the other half. To start with, we noted that most information on the web app has a heavy lean on text and not as much on visual cues. This was a problem for the visibility of system status and we gave it a score of 7/10. Flexibility and ease of use showed a lack of personalization and customization, so previous filtering settings were not remembered and a user had to reapply them on every site visit. We gave this category a score of 8/10. Due to the overwhelming reliance of text to communicate most actions, we scored the aesthetic design a 7/10. We believe there is more room for discrete actions to improve on this area. There was also a surprising lack of documentation, but we will note that this does show a key strength behind the text-heavy lean in that it gets away with not needing much documentation as a consequence. We gave this category a score of 8/10. 

The remaining categories scored well with a 10/10 each. The website had strong visibility of system information where groups and events as well as user registration information was always prominent. There is also a strong match between their online social system and the real world. Language for users and other lingo is clear and meets expectations of their usage. For example, users are referred to either as “organizers” or “attendees” and events are simply referred to as “events” or “meetups”. User control and freedom is also strong as the web app has access to the browser back button and other standard website usability features such as a clickable logo that returns a user back to the main page. Meetup.com is consistent in language and visual cues. Blue and red buttons signify important actions whereas white buttons indicate miscellaneous or related settings that pair with important actions. Events and Groups are also distinct verbiage and used often. Their app has a strong error prevention system and is very helpful in helping users recognize, diagnose, and recover from errors. It is easy to sign up for the wrong group, for example, but Meetup allows easy access to ‘leave group’. Lots of visible information regarding the group status, who to contact, or how you can take over that group if the organizer is inactive. Great use of warning popups if a user tries to leave a group by accident.

Finally, personas and scenarios were developed to better understand the potential needs of our users using our findings as informed context. By using the personas as a lens, we engaged with the information we gatered from the heuristic evaluation and competitive analysis to create a more informed and empathetic understanding of our users which influenced our initial interface design sketches. Through this process, we understood that simplicity through visual cues, personalization of the scheduling experience, and a focus on community building were key areas of focus for our users.

## Conclusions

The UX team concludes that our user demographic is looking for a social platform that encourages community buildings, scheduling, and friend-making. Our competitive analysis showed that Meetup.com is our closest frame of reference for our minimum viable product, and together with the heuristic evaluation and personas, we identified key areas for improvement. Namely, we believe that our platform should aim to be more visually engaging and stimulating, with a focus on personalization and commmunity-building. We hope that our initial sketches prove to be a step in the right direction to address these needs.

## Caveats

A few caveats to consider are that we did not engage or interview any potential users. Our findings are entirely based through the usability strategies outlined. We also did not consider the mobile app version of Meetup.com as part of our heuristic evaluation, so all information is reliant on the web version.
